Copilot/find instances of cite (#294)
symbiotic-engineering/MDOcean: pubs/renewable-energy-mdo/sections/results-discussion.tex

\end{figure}

\subsubsection{Undersized PTO}
\ifdefined\DISSERTATION
    Its PTO is similarly sized, with a slightly lower maximum force rating and slightly higher maximum power rating.
    The other objectives all retain this lower maximum force, while the maximum power rating is less consistent, falling both above and below the nominal.
\else
    It has a similarly sized PTO at slightly lower maximum force.
\fi
\ifdefined\DISSERTATION

>     Previous studies \citet{mcgilton_optimal_2024,coe_maybe_2021,devin_high-dimensional_2024,gaebele_tpl_2025,mccabe_force-limited_2024} recommend capping the maximum force well below the unsaturated point, finding that this sacrifices only minimal power, but none perform a full economic analysis confirming that the cost savings outweigh the power loss.

Author: ```suggestion
    Previous studies \citep{mcgilton_optimal_2024,coe_maybe_2021,devin_high-dimensional_2024,gaebele_tpl_2025,mccabe_force-limited_2024} recommend capping the maximum force well below the unsaturated point, finding that this sacrifices only minimal power, but none perform a full economic analysis confirming that the cost savings outweigh the power loss.
```

    The results in \Cref{remdo:sec:results-single} verify the conclusion with an appropriate cost analysis, since the optimal design sizes its powertrain small enough to require force saturation.
    The follow-up analysis in \Cref{remdo:sec:sensitivity-model-assumptions} repeats the optimization without allowing force saturation and finds a 5\% LCOE penalty.
    Force saturation is therefore highly valuable as a control technique, capable of tangible LCOE reductions once the power--cost tradeoff is considered.
    Future studies could quantify the lowest marginal PTO force price (\$/N) for which this conclusion still holds.
\else

>     Previous studies \citet{mcgilton_optimal_2024,coe_maybe_2021,devin_high-dimensional_2024,gaebele_tpl_2025,mccabe_force-limited_2024} recommend capping maximum force well below the unsaturated point to minimize power loss, but none have economically confirmed that the financial savings outweigh the performance reduction.

Author: ```suggestion
    Previous studies \citep{mcgilton_optimal_2024,coe_maybe_2021,devin_high-dimensional_2024,gaebele_tpl_2025,mccabe_force-limited_2024} recommend capping maximum force well below the unsaturated point to minimize power loss, but none have economically confirmed that the financial savings outweigh the performance reduction.
```

    In several scenarios, structural thickness variables converge to their lower bounds.
    The activity of these bound constraints (priority 2 requirements in the language of \Cref{remdo:sec:requirements}) indicates that the structures model is at the edge of its validity for thin-skinned stiffened shells, calling into question the assumption that the deflection field resembles a plate rather than a beam \citep{mccabe_development_2026}.
    Expanding the structures model to remove this assumption could yield even more efficient structural designs.
    In the minimum-cost design, the damping plate stiffeners instead decrease in size.
\else
    In all optima the three structural thicknesses decrease significantly, in several cases reaching their lower bounds, indicating lower hydrodynamic forces and reduced structural material.
    The minimum-LCOE design trades thinner damping plate for larger stiffeners, mimicking the aerospace thin-skin-and-stiffener paradigm.
    The activity of these lower-bound constraints
    (priority 2 requirements, \Cref{remdo:sec:requirements})

>     signals that the structures model is at the edge of its validity for thin-skinned stiffened shells, where the plate-like deflection assumption \citet{mccabe_development_2026} weakens;

Author: ```suggestion
    signals that the structures model is at the edge of its validity for thin-skinned stiffened shells, where the plate-like deflection assumption \citep{mccabe_development_2026} weakens;
```

    requiring a generator rated for \resultsRE[powerMaxAtMinLCOE] and \resultsRE[forceMaxAtMinLCOE] peak.
    Its estimated capital cost is \resultsRE[capexAtMinLCOE]~\$M,
    of which \resultsRE[capexDesignAtMinLCOE]~\$M is design-dependent (structural material and PTO size),

>     and its estimated LCOE is \resultsRE[minLCOE]~\$/kWh under the economic assumptions of \citep{mccabe_development_2026}.

Author: ```suggestion
    and its estimated LCOE is \resultsRE[minLCOE]~\$/kWh under the economic assumptions of \citet{mccabe_development_2026}.
```

    The minimum-LCOE design achieves \resultsRE[powerAvgAtMinLCOE] annual average electrical power at an estimated \resultsRE[minLCOE],
    a \resultsRE[pctImproveLCOEMinLCOE] improvement over the nominal \resultsRE[nominalLCOE],
    from a simultaneous \resultsRE[pctImproveDesignCostMinLCOE] design-cost reduction and

>     \resultsRE[pctImprovePowerMinLCOE] power increase (economic assumptions per \citep{mccabe_development_2026}).

Author: ```suggestion
    \resultsRE[pctImprovePowerMinLCOE] power increase (economic assumptions per \citet{mccabe_development_2026}).
```

\ifdefined\DISSERTATION
    In the multi-objective optimization, the design-dependent capital cost $C_{\text{design}}$ and average electrical power $P_{\text{avg},\text{elec}}$ are optimized simultaneously to expose the trade-off between them.
    As described in \Cref{remdo:sec:multi-obj-process}, this gives insight for cases where LCOE may not apply or is uncertain due to cost variables modeled as constant, including $OPEX$, $FCR$, and $p_0$.

>     The Pareto front is shown in \Cref{remdo:fig:pareto}, with the utopia point marked by a green star, simulated designs by squares, and the actual nominal performance reported in the RM3 reference \citet{RM3} by a diamond.

Author: ```suggestion
    The Pareto front is shown in \Cref{remdo:fig:pareto}, with the utopia point marked by a green star, simulated designs by squares, and the actual nominal performance reported in the RM3 reference \citep{RM3} by a diamond.
```

    All Pareto-front designs cost significantly less than the nominal RM3, spanning powers both below and above it.
    \Cref{remdo:fig:pareto-lcoe} provides a zoomed view with superimposed constant-$LCOE$ contours; the minimum-LCOE design lies at the tangency between the Pareto front and the contours and very nearly coincides with the maximum-power design.
    %\hl{analyze more: how are the max power and min LCOE designs different? ... multiple apparent points of tangency ...}  % TODO (scrutineering)
\else
    The multi-objective optimization simultaneously trades off design-dependent capital cost $C_{\text{design}}$ against average electrical power $P_{\text{avg},\text{elec}}$ (\Cref{remdo:sec:multi-obj-process}),
    giving insight where LCOE is inapplicable or uncertain in its constant-modeled cost terms ($OPEX$, $FCR$, $p_0$).

>     The Pareto front (\Cref{remdo:fig:pareto}) shows all designs costing significantly less than the nominal RM3 \citet{RM3} across a range of powers;

Author: ```suggestion
    The Pareto front (\Cref{remdo:fig:pareto}) shows all designs costing significantly less than the nominal RM3 \citep{RM3} across a range of powers;
```

    Examining the magnitude of change, the powertrain ratings vary most dramatically across the front while geometric and structural variables need only moderate adjustment.
    This raises the question of how much the cost savings at lower power come from smaller PTO versus smaller material cost: if PTO cost dominated, companies selling devices at multiple power levels could keep one geometric and structural design and vary only the PTO, easing design effort and economies of scale.
    Using the costs in \Cref{remdo:tab:opt-dv-values}, however, only \resultsRE[pctCostSavingsFromPTO]~of the savings come from the smaller PTO, so for a lower-power WEC under these price assumptions the slightly smaller hydrodynamic design matters far more than the substantially smaller PTO, making design reuse across power levels unlikely.

>     This differs from preliminary work \citet{mccabe_multidisciplinary_2022}, which wrongly examined only the change in optimal design without weighting the relative cost impact of PTO and dimensions.

Author: ```suggestion
    This differs from preliminary work \citep{mccabe_multidisciplinary_2022}, which wrongly examined only the change in optimal design without weighting the relative cost impact of PTO and dimensions.
```

\else
    With increasing cost and power (left to right), most design variables increase monotonically or nearly so; only $T_{f,2}$ and $h_{fs,\text{clear}}$ (both in the amplitude constraints) decrease, while the lower-bound thicknesses $t_d$ and $t_{f,b}$ stay essentially constant.

>     The powertrain ratings vary most across the front, raising whether cost savings at low power come mainly from smaller PTO or smaller material: using \Cref{remdo:tab:opt-dv-values}, only \resultsRE[pctCostSavingsFromPTO]~comes from the PTO, so the smaller hydrodynamic design dominates and design reuse across power levels is unlikely, correcting preliminary work \citet{mccabe_multidisciplinary_2022} that weighed only the design change, not its cost impact.

Author: ```suggestion
    The powertrain ratings vary most across the front, raising whether cost savings at low power come mainly from smaller PTO or smaller material: using \Cref{remdo:tab:opt-dv-values}, only \resultsRE[pctCostSavingsFromPTO]~comes from the PTO, so the smaller hydrodynamic design dominates and design reuse across power levels is unlikely, correcting preliminary work \citep{mccabe_multidisciplinary_2022} that weighed only the design change, not its cost impact.
```

\ifdefined\DISSERTATION
    The high sensitivity to wave conditions warrants a global analysis by re-optimizing for several discrete deployment locations.
    This captures interactions among the simultaneous changes in wave height, period, water depth, and storm sea state that the OAT local analysis cannot, and reveals the effect of different spectral bandwidths.

>     It shows not only which locations are most favorable through the resulting LCOE, but also whether the optimal design is robust to location through the resulting design variables which is important because global deployability is a core WEC viability requirement \citet{bull_systems_2017} and a single design usable across wave conditions facilitates economies of scale.

Author: ```suggestion
    It shows not only which locations are most favorable through the resulting LCOE, but also whether the optimal design is robust to location through the resulting design variables.
    This is important because global deployability is a core WEC viability requirement \citep{bull_systems_2017} and a single design usable across wave conditions facilitates economies of scale.
```

    
    Wave resource data for four U.S.\ locations (Humboldt Bay, CA; Pac-Wave North and South, OR; and the Wave Energy Test Site, HI) is obtained from the NREL SAM repository \citep{janzou_sam_2022}, sourced from a 2015 Sandia report \citep{dallman_characterization_2015}.
    All economic assumptions are held fixed for consistency, neglecting location-specific bathymetry (foundation cost) and distance from shore (installation and O\&M cost).
    \Cref{remdo:tab:location} gives the optimal design variables and LCOE for each location.
\else

>     The high sensitivity to wave conditions warrants a global analysis re-optimizing for four U.S.\ deployment locations (Humboldt Bay, CA; Pac-Wave North and South, OR; Wave Energy Test Site, HI), using NREL SAM wave resource data \citet{janzou_sam_2022,dallman_characterization_2015} with economic assumptions held fixed.

Author: ```suggestion
    The high sensitivity to wave conditions warrants a global analysis re-optimizing for four U.S.\ deployment locations (Humboldt Bay, CA; Pac-Wave North and South, OR; Wave Energy Test Site, HI), using NREL SAM wave resource data \citep{janzou_sam_2022,dallman_characterization_2015} with economic assumptions held fixed.
```

% 458 - 473
\subsubsection{Comparison to Other Studies on Global Deployability}
\ifdefined\DISSERTATION
    A survey indicates that 40\% of WEC developers design for site-agnostic deployment, so global deployability is of industrial interest \citep{trueworthy_wave_2020}.

>     A previous study \citet{de_andres_adaptability_2015} compares the global deployability of a uniform versus a tunable WEC design across wave climates, finding that tuning the resonant period to the dominant ocean period by changing geometry increases capture width ratio but decreases the more important power-to-mass ratio (an inverse LCOE proxy), and concluding that tuning is unfavorable because it requires expensive larger diameters.

Author: ```suggestion
    \citet{de_andres_adaptability_2015} compare the global deployability of a uniform versus a tunable WEC design across wave climates, finding that tuning the resonant period to the dominant ocean period by changing geometry increases capture width ratio but decreases the more important power-to-mass ratio (an inverse LCOE proxy), and concluding that tuning is unfavorable because it requires expensive larger diameters.
```

    Importantly, however, those devices have equal diameter and height, use only damping control, and are tuned to maximize power without regard for mass or cost.
    In MDOcean, tuning can be accomplished by varying diameter and height independently and with reactive control, and devices are tuned to minimize LCOE rather than maximize power.
    The single-objective results in \Cref{remdo:tab:opt-dv-values,remdo:tab:opt-output} agree with the overall conclusion of \citet{de_andres_adaptability_2015} that power maximization does not align with LCOE minimization, though here the additional cost of maximum power appears as PTO cost rather than structural cost.

>     Meanwhile, the location sensitivity (\Cref{remdo:tab:location}) shows a significantly larger optimal float in Hawaii, the site with the lowest common wave period, which departs from the study \citet{de_andres_adaptability_2015}, which finds small (4~m diameter) WECs optimize their LCOE proxy regardless of dominant period.

Author: ```suggestion
    Meanwhile, the location sensitivity (\Cref{remdo:tab:location}) shows a significantly larger optimal float in Hawaii, the site with the lowest common wave period.
    This departs from \citet{de_andres_adaptability_2015}, who find that small (4~m diameter) WECs optimize their LCOE proxy regardless of dominant period.
```

    This demonstrates that a more thorough multidisciplinary model is essential to draw accurate design conclusions.
\else
    A survey finds 40\% of WEC developers design for site-agnostic deployment \citep{trueworthy_wave_2020}.

>     A prior study \citet{de_andres_adaptability_2015} concludes that geometric tuning to the dominant wave period is unfavorable, but its devices have coupled diameter and height, use only damping control, and tune for power rather than cost.

Author: ```suggestion
    \citet{de_andres_adaptability_2015} concludes that geometric tuning to the dominant wave period is unfavorable, but its devices have coupled diameter and height, use only damping control, and tune for power rather than cost.
```

\ifdefined\DISSERTATION
    Using the optimization and sensitivity results, the modeling assumptions of \Cref{remdo:sec:model} can now be assessed for reasonableness.
    We examine both the model complexities MDOcean captures, to confirm they were worth including, and the shortcomings it cannot capture, to judge whether they must be added in future versions.

>     Previous studies such as \citet{garcia-teruel_reliability-based_2021} have called for this kind of systematic model-fidelity assessment to build designer confidence in the most relevant effects and their computational cost.

Author: ```suggestion
    Researchers have called for this kind of systematic model-fidelity assessment (e.g.\ \citet{garcia-teruel_reliability-based_2021}) to build designer confidence in the most relevant effects and their computational cost.
```

\else

>     The optimization and sensitivity results allow the modeling assumptions from reference \citet{mccabe_development_2026} to be assessed, both the complexities worth including and the shortcomings that may need adding, which is the kind of systematic fidelity assessment called for by the study \citep{garcia-teruel_reliability-based_2021}.

Author: ```suggestion
    The optimization and sensitivity results allow the modeling assumptions from \citet{mccabe_development_2026} to be assessed, both the complexities worth including and the shortcomings that may need adding.
    This is the kind of systematic fidelity assessment that \citet{garcia-teruel_reliability-based_2021} calls for.
```

    The observed impact of these effects justifies the corresponding model complexity and suggests other optimization frameworks should include them for realistic results.
\else
    Force saturation, slamming amplitude limits, and 2-DOF dynamics all contribute significantly to the results.% (\Cref{remdo:sec:sensitivity-model-assumptions}).
    The 2-DOF dynamics run roughly an order of magnitude slower than 1-DOF \citep{mccabe_development_2026}, suggesting worthwhile code improvements, while force saturation reduces both powertrain cost and, via lower heave loading, structural cost.
    The impact of these effects justifies their model complexity and argues for their inclusion in other frameworks.
\fi

\ifdefined\DISSERTATION
    Conversely, a few modeling complexities appear unnecessary in hindsight because they have little effect.
    \Cref{remdo:sec:sensitivities-local} finds low sensitivity to drag coefficient, and the re-optimization without drag in \Cref{remdo:sec:sensitivity-model-assumptions} confirms it, suggesting that modeling the drag nonlinearity is inessential and that future optimizations may disable drag to avoid iterating the drag damping coefficient.

>     Likewise, the slamming model is derived to be valid not only for long waves but also intermediate wavelengths, where the maximum amplitude depends on the phase of the dynamic response; the simple long-wave slamming model is reasonably accurate at sea states with an active slamming constraint \citep{mccabe_development_2026}, suggesting the intermediate-wavelength model may be unnecessary.

Author: ```suggestion
    Likewise, the slamming model is derived to be valid not only for long waves but also intermediate wavelengths, where the maximum amplitude depends on the phase of the dynamic response.
    The simple long-wave slamming model is reasonably accurate at sea states with an active slamming constraint \citep{mccabe_development_2026}, suggesting the intermediate-wavelength model may be unnecessary.
```

\ifdefined\DISSERTATION
    No constraints corresponding to priority 1 or 2 requirements are active in the optimal solution, % \hl{(double check this - structures effective breadth could make this false)}  % TODO (scrutineering)
    a hopeful sign that the true optimum is unlikely to lie in a region of model inaccuracy.
    Likewise, the inactivity of the pitch stability constraint mitigates the impact of any metacentric-height error arising from the geometry module's even-mass-distribution assumption for the center of gravity \citep{mccabe_development_2026}.
    On the other hand, the active operational-sea-state slamming constraints mean some assumptions are worth revisiting.

>     In particular, MDOcean enforces the float amplitude limits as optimization constraints rather than through the constrained optimal linear controller \citet{mccabe_development_2026}, and assumes the WEC must operate in every sea state with nonzero probability in the joint probability distribution rather than entering a survival mode \citep{mccabe_development_2026}; both assumptions interact with the active amplitude constraints and merit future reconsideration.

Author: ```suggestion
    In particular, MDOcean enforces the float amplitude limits as optimization constraints rather than through the constrained optimal linear controller \citep{mccabe_development_2026}, and assumes the WEC must operate in every sea state with nonzero probability in the joint probability distribution rather than entering a survival mode \citep{mccabe_development_2026}.
    Both assumptions interact with the active amplitude constraints and merit future reconsideration.
```

    This is relevant for small-scale Powering the Blue Economy applications with a fixed power requirement, where it is unclear whether multiple smaller WECs or one larger WEC is preferable.
    
    Additionally, a sensitivity analysis of design variables perturbed as if they were parameters would help quantify inter-disciplinary coupling and potentially inform formulation simplifications.

>     For example, a high sensitivity of the optimal structural design variables to the powertrain design variables $\left(\frac{dx^*_{\text{struct}}}{dx_{pto}}\right)$ would support this study's choice of fully coupled MDO \citet{mccabe_development_2026}, while a low value would support disciplinary decoupling.

Author: ```suggestion
    For example, a high sensitivity of the optimal structural design variables to the powertrain design variables $\left(\frac{dx^*_{\text{struct}}}{dx_{pto}}\right)$ would support this study's choice of fully coupled MDO \citep{mccabe_development_2026}, while a low value would support disciplinary decoupling.
```

    Performing this sequential optimization for the current formulation and assessing the suboptimality would quantify the value of coupling.
    The authors predict, however, that the speed of the semi-analytical models and the extensions discussed here will permit full coupling even for substantially larger WEC optimizations, including the ambitious target of comparing multiple hydrodynamic architectures with realistic powertrain models.
\else
    \Cref{remdo:sec:formulation} described the careful choice of design variables to maintain model validity and aid convergence.
    The sensitivity analysis (\Cref{remdo:sec:sensitivities-local}) suggests $D_d$, $T_{f,1}$, $T_s$, and possibly $D_{f,in}$ merit inclusion as design variables in future studies.
    Adding $N_{WEC}$ matters little for LCOE minimization but is valuable in a modified multi-objective analysis using array power, relevant to fixed-requirement Powering the Blue Economy applications weighing many small WECs against one large one.

>     A sensitivity analysis of design variables perturbed as parameters would further quantify inter-disciplinary coupling, supporting either the fully coupled approach used here \citet{mccabe_development_2026} or a future decoupled formulation should the design space grow too large for full coupling.

Author: ```suggestion
    A sensitivity analysis of design variables perturbed as parameters would further quantify inter-disciplinary coupling, supporting either the fully coupled approach used here \citep{mccabe_development_2026} or a future decoupled formulation should the design space grow too large for full coupling.
```

    Additional requirement omissions for future work include mooring loads, structural resonant mode frequencies, and overturning moment in the storm design load case.
    Requirements such as installation and manufacturing feasibility, environmental and regulatory acceptability, reliability, and social benefit are harder to incorporate but nonetheless important;
    for instance, maximum dimensions may be limited by roadway transport, as for wind turbines, constraining component dimensions to 4.3--4.6~m \citep{cotrell_analysis_2014}, though relating maximum transported component size to maximum installed WEC dimensions requires manufacturability and on-site assembly analysis beyond this scope.
    For guidance on requirements and constraints in WEC design optimization, the reader is referred to \citet{bull_systems_2017,babarit_stakeholder_2017} for a comprehensive breakdown and mapping of WEC requirements, and to \citet{trueworthy_wave_2020} for how developers prioritize requirements in practice.
\else

>     Many considerations remain uncaptured, however, such as discrete component sizing, mooring loads, structural resonant modes, storm overturning moment, and manufacturing, regulatory, and transport limits \citep{cotrell_analysis_2014}, so caution is warranted before pursuing this optimum; see \citet{bull_systems_2017,babarit_stakeholder_2017,trueworthy_wave_2020} for comprehensive WEC requirement guidance.

Author: ```suggestion
    Many considerations remain uncaptured, however, such as discrete component sizing, mooring loads, structural resonant modes, storm overturning moment, and manufacturing, regulatory, and transport limits \citep{cotrell_analysis_2014}, so caution is warranted before pursuing this optimum.
    \citet{bull_systems_2017,babarit_stakeholder_2017,trueworthy_wave_2020} give comprehensive WEC requirement guidance.
```

    Future improvements span two axes, model fidelity and optimization formulation, each applicable to the existing setup or a new one.
    With the current model, the highest-value studies are a sequential-versus-coupled comparison to quantify the benefit of full coupling per subsystem, a survivability study comparing storm survival strategies, a detailed PTO drivetrain and gear-ratio study, an array-sizing study adding $N_{WEC}$ as a design variable, and a comparison against simplified cost proxies.
    Accuracy-enhancing model additions include a more defensible nonlinear storm-force method, fatigue-lifetime-based structural sizing, and extreme-statistics amplitude assessment.

>     The most transformative additions, such as irregular waves (enabling realistic fatigue and power-variability studies), additional WEC archetypes (addressing design convergence), multi-region MEEM hydrodynamics, and a generator physics model (enabling generator control co-design \citep{anderson_re-imagining_2024,barter_beyond_2023}), would unlock qualitatively new design studies.

Author: ```suggestion
    The most transformative additions, such as irregular waves (enabling realistic fatigue and power-variability studies), additional WEC archetypes (addressing design convergence), multi-region MEEM hydrodynamics, and a generator physics model (enabling generator control co-design, as in \citet{anderson_re-imagining_2024,barter_beyond_2023}), would unlock qualitatively new design studies.
```
